# EzPAI: Scripts for extracting Plant Area Index from zenith-looking Digital Camera Photography

##Background and need: 
EzPAI was developed to meet our need to monitor tree canopy changes with Digital Camera Photography (DCP). DCPs were installed 40+ USDA soil moisture monitoring stations, that were installed to help with calibration and validation efforts of NASA’s Soil Moisture Active Passive (SMAP) over forests [1]. This particular SMAP Validation Experiment extended from 2019 through 2022, but only few stations had a continuous 4 year record (most had 3 years). Originally the experiment plan was to be conducted and completed during 2019, however a combination of COVID and SMAP satellite dropouts caused delays in the ability to conduct the field campaign until 2022.

## Rationale on making this tool:
DCP were used instead of digital hemispherical photography (DHP), due to the much greater cost of DHP. Our DCPs were wildlife cameras that only cost about $100 each [2]. Thus, we were able to install them at nearly every soil moisture station. Our DCPs were set to take output JPG imagery at high resolution (2304 x 1728 pixels) every hour. Thus, data volume could exceed 10k photos per camera. 
Although [3] already reported on how to extract PAI from for DCP back in 2012, there were no free tools to extract PAI/LAI from DCP until about 2022. In 2022, a tool for doing this kind processing was released recently for the R programming language [4], but it did not appear in our literature search ahead of developing EzPAI. Hence, we developed our own tool which like [4] is also based on [3]. 
EzPAI only uses the OpenCV library in addition to other relatively basic python libraries such as numpy, imageio, pandas, matplotlib and scikit-image. One goal was to code as much as possible using numpy. This was to allow others to check/modify the scripts to their needs easily, and also to keep the overhead low for someone to transition this 'prototype' tool to other platforms such as into a C# application that can run on Windows. Currently we have no plans to do this, due to time constraints. Although Python is a slow programming language, we were still able to process all our camera data within reasonable effort/time using EzPAI.

## Postprocessing needs and preliminary results:
Full analysis/write-up regarding the PAI extraction using this tool is still in progress. But we plotted our EzPAI results after some basic QA checking not included with this tool, consisting of: (1) a re-screening data for blue sky index, high and low bin data which results in a data reduction; and (2) calibrating crown cover (CC) and crown porosity (CP) of cloud-free imagery to that of cloudy (blue sky index < cloudythr) imagery  using linear regression. This was done because we observed ‘jumps’ in same-day CC/CP/PAI values provided by EzPAI - these apparently were clearly related to cloudy vs clear-sky conditions. Such behavior is expected a priori, attributable to illumination differences. Ryu 2012 addressed this by changing thresholds for canopy/sky discrimination depending on whether the sky was cloudy or not. Although we also implemented this consideration using different values than Ryu 2012 (see our tmthri, tmthrc values in the script), there still was a difference between cloudy and clear-sky CC/CP/PAI values. To save time, we decided to  then just work with the data provided in the csv instead and calibrated the clear-sky CC and CP data to the cloudy CC and CP, and re-calculated PAI. More details on the screening will be part of the upcoming publication. After these steps, our results for PAI (the average of 2019-2022 average summer PAI values) were then compared to where LICOR-2200 in situ data were collected over 200 m x 200 m areas around the cameras in spring and summer 2022 (N=20) [5]. Results of this comparison show R = 0.89, RMSD = 0.93, MD = -0.54, and ubRMSD = 0.75, indicating good correspondence between this tool and upward looking camera data processed by EzPAI. Other preliminary results also show that PAI results are temporally stable having within- and between-year variations of PAI (i.e., sdPAI/PAI) of < 5% at most stations.

## References:

[1] Colliander, A., Cosh, M. H., Kelly, V. R., Kraatz, S., Bourgeau-Chavez, L., Siqueira, P., ... & Yueh, S. H. (2020). SMAP detects soil moisture under temperate forest canopies. Geophysical research letters, 47(19), e2020GL089697.
[2] Moultrie WCT-00125 TimelapseCam
[3] Ryu, Y., Verfaillie, J., Macfarlane, C., Kobayashi, H., Sonnentag, O., Vargas, R., ... & Baldocchi, D. D. (2012). Continuous observation of tree leaf area index at ecosystem scale using upward-pointing digital cameras. Remote Sensing of Environment, 126, 116-125.
[4] Chianucci, F., Ferrara, C., & Puletti, N. (2022). coveR: an R package for processing digital cover photography images to retrieve forest canopy attributes. Trees, 36(6), 1933-1942.
[5] Cook, C. L. , Bourgeau-Chavez, L., Miller, M. E., Vander Bilt, D., Kraatz, S., Cosh, M.H., Colliander, A. 2024. Comparison of In Situ and Remotely Sensed Leaf Area Index of Northeastern American Deciduous, Mixed, and Coniferous Forests for SMAPVEX19-22. In Review.


